# virus_assembly

A bash pipeline for de novo assembly of viral genomes generated via Illumina NGS. Currently handles the following viruses: HIV-1, RSV, RRV and HMPV.

Current version: V1

**Table of contents**
- [System Requirements](#system-requirements)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Example](#quick-start)

# System Requirements

## Hardware requirements
The pipeline can be run on either a standard computer or a HPC server. We tested the pipeline on a standard desktop computer with the following specifications:

RAM: 16+ GB
CPU: 4+ cores, @1.90 GHz


## Software requirements
### OS requirements
The pipeline has been tested on several Linux operating systems including the following systems:

Linux: Ubuntu 16.04, Ubuntu 18.04, Ubuntu 20.04

### Dependencies

A conda package manager like [Miniconda3](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html). Instructions on how to install:
1.  Download the latest miniconda installation script
   ```
   wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
   ```
2. Make the miniconda installation script executable
  ```
  chmod +x Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
  ```
3. un miniconda installation script
  ```
  bash ./Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
  ```


# Installation
Time to install the pipeline took less than 15 minutes on standard desktop computer.


1.  Download the initial environment installation file 
   ```
   wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/laulambr/virus_assembly/main/scripts/install_env.sh
   ```
2. Run the script in the terminal 
  ```
   bash ./install_env.sh
   ```
3. Check if installation worked
  ```
   conda activate virus_assembly
  ```
# Usage
   ```
 Pipeline: NGS pipeline for viral assembly.
usage: virus_assembly [-h -v -p -q] (-i dir -m value -t value )
(-s string) 
with:
    -h  Show help text
    -v  Version of the pipeline
    -n  Name of RUN.
    -i  Input directory
    -s  Viral species [HIV, RSV, RRV, HMPV]
    -c  Perform clipping of primers
    -q  Perform quality check using fastQC
    -m  Memory
    -t  Number of threads
   ```
## Quick start
 1. Activate environment.
 
   ```
   conda activate virus_assembly
  ```
 2. Head to the directory where you will perform the analysis.
 3. Place the raw fastq.gz files in a directory called source.  
 4. Create a list holding the sample names from you sequencing files called IDs.list and place it in the main directory.
 5. Start the pipeline using the following command
   ```
   virus_assembly -i path/to/main/directory -s VIRUS 
  ```
6. When the pipeline has finished, 5 additional folders will have been created:
      * 1_reads: Includes the trimmed and normalised reads.
      * 2_ref_map: Includes a bam file of the trimmed reads against the viral reference genome and a pdf with the qualimap results.
      * 3_contigs: Includes the de novo assembled contigs by megahit for each sample.
      * 4_filter: Includes the high converage contigs generated by megahit (_ *_hicov.fasta_), filtered and reorientated against the viral reference genome (_ *_reoriented.fa_)
      * 5_remap: Includes both a fasta file holding the viral contigs for that sample and a bam file of the trimmed reads agains those contigs. 
  
## Example
We provide an example analysis using pre-installed test data, which took less than 1 minute on standard desktop.

 1. Activate environment.
 
   ```
   conda activate virus_assembly
  ```
  2. Head to the directory with the github clone of this repository and head to the test data folder 
   ```
 cd $CONDA_PREFIX/virus_assembly/test_data
  ```
  3. Run the following command
   ```
 virus_assembly -i $CONDA_PREFIX/virus_assembly/test_data -s HIV
  ```
  4. The pipeline will run, check the newly created 5_read directory for a fasta file containing the new de novo assembled HIV-1 provirus.
   
## Included viral reference genomes
  * **HIV**: K03455.1
  * **RSV**: MH760627; MH760652
  * **RRV**: RRV_ref (Accession pending)
  * **HMPV**: HMPV205; HMPV218 (Accessions pending)

